---
layout: post
title: "Remote Work: Location based compensation"
desc: Explore location-based compensation in remote work through a software engineer's lens. Discuss fairness, impacts on remote work culture, and the future of tech industry salaries.
keywords: location-based compensation adjustments, remote work, software engineer, compensation fairness, remote work salary, geographic pay scale, location-based pay, remote work challenges, global talent pool, cost of living adjustment
date: 2023-06-12
---

## The Evolution of Work

Once upon a time, location was not a factor in finding a job. You worked where
you were. We didn't even think about any other possibility. Your physical
location limited your job prospects and your earning potential.

Living and working as a software engineer in Mexico, working for a great
technology company was merely a dream. And the dream involved relocating. Fast
forward a couple of decades later and the dream has become reality, but with a
twist. Remote work is the norm, not the exception.

As an industry and society though, we are still adapting to the new
reality. There are a lot of arguments in favor of remote work, many against. And
companies and employees are figuring out how to make it work. What is the best
setup, processes, philosophies, techniques, etc.

One of such is _location-based compensation adjustments_.

## Location based compensation adjustments

A few days ago I received an intriguing job offer. The role was interesting, the
company well known in the startup world. But, there was a hitch. They offered
less than the advertised range. They applied a 20% location-based adjustment to
the offered compensation because of where I live. Despite the job being remote,
they considered my physical location a factor to apply to my compensation.

I've seen many companies that do this, I usually ignore those job postings but
in this instance I missed the fine print.

I often question the logic behind this. In the past, my sole focus was to be a
master at my craft. I invested years to build and improve my skills, to
understand the nuances of software development. Now, my geographic location,
irrelevant to my ability as a developer, was a deciding factor in my
compensation.

## The Companyâ€™s Perspective

Location-based compensation adjustments are often pitched as a means of
fairness. The argument is that since the cost of living varies significantly
from one region to another, it is equitable that pay scales are adjusted
accordingly.

Does it? Does it truly promote fairness?

Is it really fair to pay an employee less money for the same work just because
of where they happen to live? Isn't it a bit _too much_ that the company is
taking it upon itself to police which standard of living their employees should
have based on their role and position?

Could it be that it just happens to save some money?

I understand companies need to maintain profitability. I don't take it personal
when companies do this, or when they offer below market base compensation
because that's all they can afford. It is my decision if I want to work for that
company based on other factors.  But we should call things what they are.

## Turning Down the Offer

In the end I chose to decline the offer. It simply didn't sit right with me. I
just knew that this was going to sit in the back of my mind and be a constant
reminder that the work that I would do was considered to be -20% less valuable,
regardless of its own merits. It's not about the money, but the principle.

As I said, I didn't burn any bridges. I had a very lighthearted conversation
with the Hiring Manager. I understand that's what they do, and it's up to me if
that is how I want to work, and decided it wasn't.

## Final Thoughts

So here we are, at the frontier of a new era, where you can do work from
anywhere in the world. As we navigate this blurred landscape we should try very
hard not to bring the old paradigms with us. We should shed the old, outdated
practices and develop new ones. It's time we moved away from arbitrary factors
like location and focused more on the skills and the value we bring to the
table.

A the end of the day, it's the human behind the computer that counts, not where
they happen to live.

Let's create a future where fair compensation isn't determined by a map, but by
the merit of our work.
